Ilariae/solana shims (#532)
wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs: products/messaging/guides/solana-shims/sol-emission.md

Reviewer: In my opinion, this whole file should focus more on the concrete steps a new integrator would take to publish messages via the emission shim. There is an example program instruction [here](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole/blob/main/svm/wormhole-core-shims/anchor/programs/wormhole-integrator-example/src/instructions/post_message.rs).

---
title: Efficient Emission on Solana (Shim)
description: Learn how to reduce rent costs when emitting Wormhole messages on Solana by using the emission shim instead of post_message.
categories: Basics
---

# Efficient Emission on Solana (Shim)

This guide explains how to use Wormhole’s emission shim on Solana to reduce the cost of message emission. The shim enables integrators to emit messages without creating a new account for each message, minimizing rent costs and state bloat while maintaining Guardian compatibility.

For more background, see [Solana Shims concept page](/docs/products/messaging/concepts/solana-shim/){target=\_blank}. For deployment steps, see [Shim Deployment guide](/docs/products/messaging/guides/solana-shims/shim-deployment/){target=\_blank}.

## Using the Emission Shim

> The emission shim exposes a [`post_message`](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole/blob/main/solana/bridge/program/src/api/post_message.rs){target=\_blank} instruction that matches the signature and accounts of `post_message_unreliable`. If you are already emitting messages via Wormhole, integrating the shim is a minimal change—primarily just switching the program address.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The emission shim exposes a [`post_message`](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole/blob/main/solana/bridge/program/src/api/post_message.rs){target=\_blank} instruction that matches the signature and accounts of `post_message_unreliable`. If you are already emitting messages via Wormhole, integrating the shim is a minimal change, primarily just switching the program address.
```

### Required Accounts

> Your transaction to the shim’s post_message should include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your transaction to the shim’s `post_message` should include:
```

- You still pay the Wormhole fee via `fee_collector` (parallelization limits apply).

## Guardian Behavior

Guardians are configured to:

- Watch for instructions to the emission shim’s program address.
- Extract the message data, emitter, sequence, and nonce from instruction data and the CPI event, not from an on-chain message PDA.
- Ignore the empty account that the core bridge might write (since the payload is empty), preventing duplicate VAAs.

At least 13/19 Guardians must monitor the shim for your emissions to reliably result in VAAs. Until then, shim emissions may not be processed by the full network.

## Deployment

- Build and deploy the emission shim to Solana using a verifiable build.
- Test the program on mainnet or testnet.
- Drop upgrade authority after confirming correct operation.
- See the [Solana Shim Deployment Guide](/docs/products/messaging/guides/solana-shims/shim-deployment/){target=\_blank} for detailed deployment steps.

## Limitations and Security Considerations 

> - **Rent**: No persistent account rent is paid for every emission—cost is now dominated by compute and the emission fee.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Rent**: No persistent account rent is paid for every emission; the cost is now dominated by compute and the emission fee.
```

---
title: Efficient Emission on Solana (Shim)
description: Learn how to reduce rent costs when emitting Wormhole messages on Solana by using the emission shim instead of post_message.
categories: Basics
---

# Efficient Emission on Solana (Shim)

This guide explains how to use Wormhole’s emission shim on Solana to reduce the cost of message emission. The shim enables integrators to emit messages without creating a new account for each message, minimizing rent costs and state bloat while maintaining Guardian compatibility.

> For more background, see [Solana Shims concept page](/docs/products/messaging/concepts/solana-shim/){target=\_blank}. For deployment steps, see [Shim Deployment guide](/docs/products/messaging/guides/solana-shims/shim-deployment/){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer: Integrators don't need deployment steps.

> !!!info "What does 'shim' mean here?"

Reviewer: see prior comments on why this section is incorrect.

    - For emission, the shim is a new Solana program that you deploy and use instead of the legacy `post_message` instruction.
    - For verification, the 'shim' is not a program but a pattern—simply clean up temporary accounts after using existing Core Bridge instructions.
    - See [Shim Emission and Verification](/docs/products/messaging/concepts/solana-shim/#shim-emission-and-verification) for more details.

## Using the Emission Shim

> The emission shim exposes a [`post_message`](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole/blob/main/solana/bridge/program/src/api/post_message.rs){target=\_blank} instruction that matches the signature and accounts of `post_message_unreliable`. If you are already emitting messages via Wormhole, integrating the shim is a minimal change, primarily just switching the program address.

Reviewer: ```
that matches the signature and accounts of `post_message_unreliable`
```

It does not exactly match. Integrators should follow the [IDL](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole/blob/main/svm/wormhole-core-shims/anchor/idls/wormhole_post_message_shim.json). That said, it should be a minimal change.

### Required Accounts

Your transaction to the shim’s `post_message` should include:

- `bridge`: Core Bridge config (mutable).
- `message`: PDA for posted message (account is reused by the shim, not unique per message).
- `emitter`: The emitter address (Signer).
- `sequence`: PDA for sequence tracking (mutable).
- `payer`: Pays compute and (if needed) new account rent (Signer).
- `fee_collector`: Fee account (mutable).
- `clock`: Sysvar for current time.

> These are exactly as expected for the regular core bridge interface.

Reviewer: `system_program`, `wormhole_program`, and `event_authority` are missing. See the [IDL](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole/blob/main/svm/wormhole-core-shims/anchor/idls/wormhole_post_message_shim.json).

### Data Payload

The instruction takes a `PostMessageData` struct, which consists of:

- `nonce` ++"u32"++: Unique value per message for replay protection.
- `payload` ++"Vec<u8>"++: The actual message data.
- `consistency_level` ++"enum"++: How many confirmations are required for the message to be considered valid.

Example Anchor call:

```rust
shim_program
    .post_message(
        ctx.accounts,
        nonce,
        payload,
        consistency_level,
    )?;
```

## How It Works

> - **Shim Contract**: Exposes a `post_message` instruction with the same arguments as `post_message_unreliable`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Shim Program**: Exposes a `post_message` instruction with the same arguments as `post_message_unreliable`.
```

- **Sequence Handling**: Reads the sequence number from the core bridge and emits it in a [CPI event](https://www.anchor-lang.com/docs/basics/cpi){target=\_blank}, along with the timestamp.
- **Message Account**: Calls `post_message_unreliable` on the core bridge, writing an empty payload, so no unique message is stored on-chain.
- **Guardian Role**: Guardians reconstruct the message from instruction data and the emitted event, not from a persistent account.

```mermaid
graph LR
    A[Integrator Program]
    B[Emission Shim]
    C[Core Bridge]
    D[Guardians]

    A -- call post_message --> B
    B -- emits event & calls core --> C
    C -- instruction data & event --> D
```

The typical flow in your on-chain logic:

1. Prepare the accounts.
2. Call the shim’s `post_message`, passing your payload, nonce, and desired consistency level.

> For most integrators, the only adjustment is to change the program ID to the shim and, if migrating mid-sequence, ensure you do not reuse any (emitter, sequence) pairs. Sequence tracking continues as before; only the storage model changes.

Reviewer: Integrators do not have to worry about emitter/sequence reuse as the same sequence account is used. The storage model for sequence numbers remains unchanged - they continue to be managed by the Core Bridge (this is one of the reasons for the underlying Core Bridge `post_message_unreliable` call).

> The emission fee is still paid. The sequence is tracked on the core bridge as usual. However, instead of storing your message in a new PDA account, the shim emits a CPI event with the sequence and timestamp, and passes an empty payload to the core bridge. All the data needed for Guardians is captured in the transaction logs.

Reviewer: new ~PDA~ account.

other than that, this statement is correct and I don't feel the prior paragraph is necessary.

## Migration Guidance

If migrating from the legacy emission path:

> - Continue incrementing your emitter’s sequence number; do not reset or overlap with any previous values.

Reviewer: This isn't up to the integrator. Remove this statement.

- No account resizing needed; the shim handles variable-length payloads by always passing an empty payload to the core bridge.
- For on-chain programs that only call the shim via CPI, consider emitting a dummy/empty message after migration to avoid edge cases with initial CPI depth (Solana limits the depth of cross-program calls).
- You still pay the Wormhole fee via `fee_collector` (parallelization limits apply).

## Guardian Behavior

Guardians are configured to:

- Watch for instructions to the emission shim’s program address.

> - Extract the message data, emitter, sequence, and nonce from instruction data and the CPI event, not from an on-chain message PDA.

Reviewer: on-chain message ~PDA~

- Ignore the empty account that the core bridge might write (since the payload is empty), preventing duplicate VAAs.

> At least 13/19 Guardians must monitor the shim for your emissions to reliably result in VAAs. Until then, shim emissions may not be processed by the full network.

Reviewer: This states "until then", but all 19 guardians are currently configured with the shim. This is visible in the Guardians list view in [the dashboard](https://wormhole-foundation.github.io/wormhole-dashboard/#/?endpoint=Mainnet).

> ## Deployment

Reviewer: These are already deployed. Integrators do not need to build or deploy them.

- Build and deploy the emission shim to Solana using a verifiable build.
- Test the program on mainnet or testnet.
- Drop upgrade authority after confirming correct operation.
- See the [Solana Shim Deployment Guide](/docs/products/messaging/guides/solana-shims/shim-deployment/){target=\_blank} for detailed deployment steps.

## Limitations and Security Considerations 

- **Rent**: No persistent account rent is paid for every emission; the cost is now dominated by compute and the emission fee.
- **Logs**: Since all observability is log-based, re-observation is only possible while Solana transaction history is available.
- **Parallelization**: Still limited by the `fee_collector` account being mutable.
- **CPI Depth**: The first shim call for an emitter adds one extra stack depth. This is only relevant if you are near the Solana CPI limit (4).

> Always ensure that every (emitter, sequence) pair is unique. Never emit two messages with the same combination, or you may create unredeemable VAAs. Once you’ve confirmed the shim works as intended, drop upgrade authority to prevent future tampering.

Reviewer: This is not under the integrator's control. That's besides the fact that it would not "create unredeemable VAAs". I recommend removing this paragraph.

---
title: Solana Message Emission via Shim
description: Learn how to reduce rent costs when emitting Wormhole messages on Solana by using the emission shim instead of post_message.
categories: Basics
---

# Solana Message Emission via Shim

> The emission shim is a lightweight Solana program that lets integrators emit Wormhole messages without creating a new rent-exempt account for every message. Instead, it passes an empty payload to the core bridge and emits instead the data through transaction logs, cutting rent costs and avoiding state bloat while remaining fully compatible with Guardian observation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The emission shim is a lightweight Solana program that lets integrators emit Wormhole messages without creating a new rent-exempt account for every message. It passes an empty payload to the core bridge and emits the message data through transaction logs, reducing rent costs and avoiding state bloat while remaining fully compatible with Guardian observation.
```

Migrating from the legacy path is straightforward: no account resizing is needed, and programs can call the shim directly. The Wormhole fee is still paid through the `fee_collector`, with the same parallelization limits as before. 

> Guardians are configured to observe the canonical shim address, reading message data, emitter, and nonce from the transaction logs and CPI events instead of on-chain accounts, while ignoring the empty core bridge payload to prevent duplicate VAAs. On mainnet, all 19 Guardians support shim emissions, and, as with all Wormhole messages, at least 13 attestations are required for a valid VAA.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Guardians are configured to observe the canonical shim address, reading message data, emitter, and nonce from the transaction logs and CPI events, rather than on-chain accounts. They also ignore the empty core bridge payload to prevent duplicate VAAs. On mainnet, all 19 Guardians support shim emissions, and, as with all Wormhole messages, at least 13 attestations are required for a valid VAA.
```

!!!note
    For on-chain programs that only call the shim via CPI, consider emitting a dummy/empty message after migration to avoid edge cases with initial CPI depth (Solana limits the depth of cross-program calls).

For more background, see [Emission Shim concept section](/docs/products/messaging/concepts/solana-shim/#emission-shim){target=\_blank}. 

## Prerequisites

To interact with the emission shim, you'll need the following:

- [Rust and Solana CLI](https://docs.solana.com/cli/install-solana-cli-tools){target=\_blank} installed.  

> - [Anchor installed](https://www.anchor-lang.com/docs/installation){target=\_blank}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- [Anchor installed](https://www.anchor-lang.com/docs/installation){target=\_blank}.
```

- The canonical emission shim program already deployed at [`EtZMZM22ViKMo4r5y4Anovs3wKQ2owUmDpjygnMMcdEX`](https://explorer.solana.com/address/EtZMZM22ViKMo4r5y4Anovs3wKQ2owUmDpjygnMMcdEX){target=\_blank}.
- The shim’s [IDL](https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/wormhole/blob/main/svm/wormhole-core-shims/anchor/idls/wormhole_post_message_shim.json){target=\_blank} for wiring accounts.
- A payer (signer) funded with enough SOL to cover compute and message fees.

## Setup

> To start, import the shim crate so we can call `wormhole_post_message_shim::cpi::post_message`. Then, pull the core bridge addresses needed to be passed along.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To start, import the shim crate to call `wormhole_post_message_shim::cpi::post_message`. Then, pull the core bridge addresses needed to be passed along.
```

```rs
--8<-- 'code/products/messaging/guides/shims/post_message.rs::9'
```

## Accounts

> When calling the shim’s `post_message` instruction, you need to pass:

Reviewer 3: For this list can we convert all of the bullets into the same format. What I mean by this is to convert them all into sentence fragments where a period isn't necessary, or a full sentence where a period is. 

Fragment vs Complete Sentence :
- `bridge`: Wormhole core bridge config  ( no period since there is no verb )
- `payer`: Pays compute and any rent needed on first use (signer).  ( Period because there is a verb)

- `bridge`: Wormhole core bridge config.
- `message`: PDA derived from the emitter; reused by the shim instead of generating new accounts.
- `emitter`: The emitter address (signer).
- `sequence`: Emitter's sequence account.
- `payer`: Pays compute and any rent needed on first use (signer).
- `fee_collector`: Wormhole fee collector..
- `clock`: Sysvar for current time.
- `system_program`: Standard Solana system program (for account creation on first use).
- `wormhole_program`: The Wormhole core bridge program.
- `event_authority`: PDA used by the shim to emit log events (Anchor CPI events).
- `program`: The shim program itself.

> Define the accounts your instruction needs. The struct below wires the shim and Core together, ensuring your emitter PDA can sign the CPI via seeds.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The struct below specifies the accounts required by your instruction and links the shim to the core bridge, allowing the emitter PDA to sign the CPI via seeds.
```

```rs
--8<-- 'code/products/messaging/guides/shims/post_message.rs:10:48'
```

This instruction reuses a single per-emitter message PDA (no per-message rent). When invoked, the shim emits your payload as an Anchor CPI event and, in the same transaction, calls the core bridge with an empty payload, allowing the core bridge to still assign the sequence and enforce fees/finality. Guardians read the Core call (sequence/finality) and the shim event (payload) from the transaction logs, producing a standard VAA without leaving a persistent message account.

## Call post_message

> The `post_message` function transfers the Core message fee, calls the shim via CPI, passes the nonce, finality, and your payload, and signs the CPI with your emitter PDA.

Reviewer: `post_message` does not "transfer the Core message fee" or "sign the CPI with your emitter PDA" (`CpiContext::new_with_signer` technically does the latter)

```rs
--8<-- 'code/products/messaging/guides/shims/post_message.rs:62'
```

> ## Limitations and Security Considerations 

Reviewer 3: I'm not really understanding why Security Considerations is in the title. I think these are more operational considerations. 
I see what you have here as :
Rent → purely about cost efficiency.
Logs → about message availability (durability), not about trust, correctness, or confidentiality.
Parallelization → a concurrency bottleneck, but not exploitable in a way that undermines security.
CPI depth → a technical stack limit, not a security issue.
